I'm excited to introduce our featured guest today on the lab, Andrew Heiss. You probably
know him from his blog. I certainly do. Andrew, would you like to say hello, introduce yourself?
Hi, this is exciting seeing all these people. So I'm Andrew Heiss. I'm an assistant professor at
Georgia State University in Atlanta. I do our stuff. I teach data visualization,
causal inference type stuff. If you're on social media, you've seen me there. I was on Twitter for
years and then it died. And so now I'm on Blue Sky and kind of LinkedIn, but mostly Blue Sky
and have a blog. Lots of people use it. I have lots of teaching websites that you may have seen.
Lots of you have copies of them and that's awesome. I always stumble on random class websites
and it's my stuff and it's always fun to see that. So copy my stuff, everybody. This is cool.
You heard it here first, copy his stuff. I feel like that's the open source community,
we're all about it. All right, Andrew, what are you going to be showing us today? And if you
would like to go ahead and start sharing your screen, you can do that at any time.
Yeah, let me share my screen. So in general, this is my first time ever actually being at a data
science lab. I've been to a couple of Hangouts and those are more formal, but this is just
showing cool stuff because lots of people ask me all the time how I do stuff so fast. And one,
I don't, it just looks like it. But two, I have lots of cool little programs and extensions and
things that I use a lot. And so I switched to Positron in September 2024, a few months after
it first came out. And so I've been using that full time for the past almost 18 months now. And
so I have lots of cool little tips and tricks that I've stumbled across over the past year and a half
of doing that. And then just other general neat things that make life easier. So that's kind of
what I'm gonna show you all today and answer whatever questions you have. So excited.
So let me share my screen here and switch away from Positron. Oh, so I actually, in the spirit
of just sharing everything, if you go to my blog, now there is a post with all of the links to the
things that I'm going to show. And so I also put that in Discord just now. So you can get to it
directly that way too. But also just ask whatever questions you have. So in general, like, Libby and
I talked about this before, kind of the general outline for this. And so what we wanted to start
off with was just general Positron stuff, how to find good extensions, how to do some fancy neat
things with like the connections pane in Positron, other things like that. And then we'll look at
some other cool workflow things that work both on Mac OS and on Windows. So if I'm a Mac person,
but if you're a Windows person, you can still do all of this cool stuff too. So first I wanted to
talk about the extensions. Because this is something I've noticed a lot. I still have not
switched to Positron when teaching R. I'm still using RStudio in part just because VS Code
slash Positron is kind of a bigger beast because it works across like all languages, not just R.
And so with students, I find that it's easier to just stick with RStudio. And then near the
end of the semester, I point them to Positron and say, hey, this is a thing. And so with RStudio,
that ecosystem is like related to the general R ecosystem. So all of like the RStudio add-ons,
we tend to like inherently trust them because it's people in like the R community making little
add-ons like ggthemeassist and other neat things that let you do cool stuff. And so I've rarely run
into people like worried about installing extensions or add-ons in RStudio. But I have
run into that with VS Code slash Positron, in part because that's a huge community. It's people who
do like Rust full time or JavaScript full time, and then they make their own extensions. And so
I don't know any of those people. And there's no like CRAN that like vets everything. And so
I'm not necessarily worried about like malicious code showing up in the different extensions,
just like how well the extensions work. And so one thing I wanted to show really quick is just
kind of how I can tell if stuff like if an extension is good and safe to install. I have
like a few heuristics here. So like this right here, this better comments thing, it's on so
the OpenVSX extension store is like the open source version of the VS Code extension store.
But all of those extensions live at GitHub. And so I'll check like if I come across something
like this better comments thing. I look and see what it does. It's got cool screenshots and stuff.
That's neat. And so they'll do special syntax highlighting if you have like a to-do comment
or other types of comments. But then I also check to see if it's highly rated. The OpenVSX
ratings are like useless, because very few people actually use this thing. So it's got like,
I've never used it. Yeah, like the five people have clicked on five stars. Neat.
But like tons of people have downloaded this thing. So sometimes they'll even look at the
repository or the the extension on VS Codes store just to see what people there are saying about it.
Because the OpenVSX world is kind of dead. Because nobody comments there. But also look at like the
GitHub repository for it just to see this hasn't been updated in four years. It's got a bunch of
issues still that are fairly recent. And nothing's been changing. But all it really does is change
syntax highlighting for stuff. So I'm not super concerned if it's not super updated, because
it doesn't do much. If it's something more important, more complex, and it hasn't been
updated for a while, then I'll just like not. I'll still like install it and play around with it. And
generally, it'll be like really buggy if it hasn't been updated for a while.
But those are my general heuristics. I'll look at like the OpenVSX page,
check the GitHub page, check the VS Code version of it and see what people are saying about it.
And then if it looks cool, I'll install it and play around with it.
So that's my general process for doing that. Okay, sweet. Now I'm going through and clicking
on all of mine that I've added in the past couple of months and like inspecting them.
Yeah, I do that too. Like I'll go through like I forget what I've installed. And if I'm not like
using it, I'll go and disable it or uninstall it. But I always forget what I've turned on.
So it's useful to go back and check stuff. Cool. So some of the good ones that I've found,
I put error here just because it's neat, but it's built into Positron. So this is the automatic
code formatter and linter. Some people actually have there's a setting in Positron where you can
have it run every time you save a file. I don't want to relinquish that much control to computers
like reformatting my code every time I save but some people do and that's cool. What I mostly use
it for is like if I have code, let me just grab some code like ggplot and then AES. Wow,
we'll zoom in a bit. So I'll do something like AES x equals something plus geom point. Okay,
so that's like horrific R code there. If I just select it and then do Command Shift A,
it will reformat it using error and follow all of the fancy tidyverse rules. There are other
settings you can change with error. The documentation shows how to do it. I haven't
messed with any of those. I'm happy with that and it works. It has cool heuristics too. Like if it
sees that I have like the data set on a new line and then I run it, then it assumes I want all of
the arguments to be on new lines and so it'll update that automatically and so error is really
cool for that. Better comments I already showed like if you have some comments here like neat
this is a comment and then later I say to do this is important. Notice how it's like orange
and that just automatically got picked up because I have that better comments extension turned on
and so it recognizes a bunch of other things. I basically only really use to do because I forget
what the others are but I should probably eventually learn what they are because they're
cool. I used to do a lot so this is really useful. I want my to do's to stand out or I want them to
be put into a list for me somewhere. Yeah and there are other extensions that will give like a
little pane in the side here that will list like all your to do's. I think one is called to do tree.
I have that on for a while but what I ran into there is it picks up everything in a folder and
so if you have like quarto extensions or renv actually this ran in this was an issue because
you have like whole copies of like our packages and so if other people are using to do's in like
extension files then those also appear in like the list of everything you have to do and so there's
ways of like filtering those out and omitting certain folders but I always like I'm too lazy
to do it and so my lazy way of doing it is I just like search for to do and there's all the to do's
in my product which is like the the poor man's way of doing it but there are cool extensions that you
do it. Cool. I don't even know how you search in that sidebar like I've never clicked that button
before until you just clicked it and I was like oh there's a search button. Yeah so there's there's a
search button it's uh command shift f or control shift f it will um that's what I usually do yeah
keyword yeah but it's it's here that will search the whole project oh um notice how this is up at
the top isn't that cool so this is brand new um as of like earlier this week so if you are in
positron with this explorer thing here and you right click you can change the activity to bar
position by default it's over on the side this is typically where everybody sees it um and that
is extra real estate over on the side here and so if you right click and say top and it puts it up at
the top and then you have extra space with the file thing um which is yes really I love it and
you can get there with um control shift p command shift p recording I fix it uh you can uh just type
in activity and I think you get your like yeah move activity bar to side side or bottom yeah
although I feel like there are a couple other ways to do this just know that you can you can
get to it multiple ways y'all yeah oh so Tyler in discord says it'll search everything in the
project even if you don't have it open yes um so like here's a big project this is my
website here so if I search here for I don't know tidyverse um it's in 118 different files
I have the word tidyverse in this whole project here um if you click them do you get to them just
like in our studio it'll yep so it'll jump to it there nice um it also if you click on this little
thing you can do a find and replace thing and so I could call it like I think way back in the day
people were trying to call it the head so we could like I could click on that button right there and
that would replace all in the entire project um which is terrifying I'm not going to click on that
don't don't do that um you can do like regular expression stuff you can tell it which folders to
exclude or include you can be more careful about what you're searching there but yeah that search
stuff is neat cool thank you for indulging our search questions yeah I know I it's it's a super
cool thing um all right so other things um so the better comments one really cool thing is this
one called past them or paste them I don't know what it's officially called um this is so cool
and very few people know about this so get ready for some magic so if you like select some like a
spreadsheet from excel or just like copy a table from html or something and then if I come to like
positron here let me move this out of the way and then if I paste it it pastes it like this it's no
longer like uh tab separated or anything um but what I can do is if I do if I open like the command
palette thing and do paste them I can here show all of these paste them so I can have it paste
as a julia data frame or a python data frame or a markdown table or an r data frame and if I choose
our data frame I can say I want it as a table or a triple or a data dot table or polars or base
so let's do a triple there it is it's automatically a triple um or any other type of thing let's see
what it looks like as a data table yeah so that's cool um and automatic so yes then let's do that
thank you uh miles mcbain for being the data pasta pioneer here and then I think that um paste them
was done to like mimic data pasta by anatoly I think is his name so thank you anatoly for giving
us that because if you haven't used data pasta it is an add-in for our studio specifically for our
studio um add-ins are like our studio's version of these extensions and positron um and it's magical
and I love it I use it all the time and so when positron first came out that was one of the things
I really missed so paste them fantastic post them paste them I don't know how I like paste them
because you paste things yeah you paste things yeah um cool
that's not spelled right okay so what I'm going to do here is show another little extension called
rainbow csv um it's really simple all it really does is highlight different columns in a cs in a
plain text csv file with different colors um so if you ever have to manually like edit a csv file or
look at it um then that's helpful so like if I click on the csv file here in positron it'll
automatically add like open the csv file as this cool data explorer thing which is helpful but if
I want to like hand type in it like I can't do that here but there's this open as plain text file
so if I click on that it'll open it as plain text but notice how each of these columns now have a
specific color um and that's coming from rainbow csv here so that's helpful like if you ever have
to manually type something now you can see um that that 15 is part of the this column now and
the 220 is part of the sex column and everything's like messed up now um and that's really visible
with that rainbow csv thing um which is helpful amazing um one other one if you do writing in
positron um you might want like a spell checker like if you're doing like quarto writing and stuff
um there are lots of different spell checkers out there the one I like the most is called spell
right um I have it linked here it is supposed to use the um built-in spell checker dictionary for
your system so if you're on a mac it uses the mac um yeah so it uses the system spelling api
the windows one uses whatever windows api it is that's cool because all the other ones I've found
use like hun spell or like open source dictionaries that you have to like keep in parallel
and so like if you're on a on a mac typing in some other program and you add a word to the
dictionary that's the same dictionary that that positron will use and so you don't have to
maintain like separate dictionaries and stuff um and so this is like if I am doing my literate
programming in quarto and I'm writing actual like narrative along with my stuff it's going to do all
of my spell checking for me yep so right there tidyverse is not spelled directly because it's not
a word um and so it's it has that red underline there there I think there's a way I could add it
to to your like your mac one right yeah if I I think if I add it like if I go to the spelling
settings like in here there's like spell right so add selection user dictionary that I think that
adds it to the system wide dictionary um or it would put it in some special like vs code positron
thing but I'm not sure it doesn't take into account words that are in word because word uses
its own internal dictionary it doesn't use the mac os dictionary so um that's just words thing
all right cool Tyler thank you for that question that was a good one cool and then the final little
extension thing I want to show is related to um another question I get all the time and lots of
like the whole positron team gets is this notion of projects um so in RStudio you have the rproj
file that lets you create like an RStudio project so when you double click on it
it opens a new RStudio instance and sets the working directory to that place and it's great
um Jenny Bryan won't burn down your computer because you're using the rproj things and it's
wonderful um positron does not have an equivalent of an rproj file um and there's actually like a
whole faq site or page on the positron site about this um what it does instead is it follows the
the same philosophy as vs code in general like if you open a folder in positron or in vs code
it sets the working directory to that folder and then everything kind of lives there and so it's
your job to open a folder in positron um you can do that like on a mac you can just like drag a
folder from finder down into positron and it'll do it so here's a random folder I don't know what's
in here but if I drag it to positron done that is now a project um where the working directory is
set to that place doesn't there's it's just csv files so it doesn't really do much but that is
how you kind of open a project um positron has this upper corner menu for recent projects you've
opened so these are just recent folders that you've opened our studio has a similar thing you
can open the project in a new window you can open the project directly and replace the window but
that's all there you can also go to open folder um there's probably a command thing here called
open folder yep you can do the command palette thing and open a folder that way and that all
works um you could also have multi-folder workspaces in yes so that I've never actually
done um I've done it once and I got confused I and I removed it but at least you can do it
yeah so the the way it calls that a workspace so you can save a workspace which is either a single
folder or a set of folders that all open up um and then you can that is actually a file um and so
like on my personal blog this is before I knew what I was doing so on my personal blog I have
an rproj file and I also have this code workspace thing um this dot code workspace file that is the
workspace so if I double click on that in finder it would open positron to that place um but I
actually never use that anymore I either drag it down or there's a cool extension called project
manager oh I can't wait to see this one little shortcuts for different projects you have on your
computer but before we go there I want to pause really quickly because Tyler had a couple of good
questions um there was one that might be for the chat which is do you know if there are extensions
or maybe packages that will conditionally format cells of data frames exported to xlsx files I
don't know the answer to that I have stopped working in xlsx files I haven't in years but
if somebody else knows please let Tyler know in the chat and then also Tyler also asked do you add
explicitly add a dot here file to your project root when you're working in positron I don't but
that's because so the the here thing so I do use the here package all the time um and it has lots
of different heuristics to figure out where the root of the project is and so um I I actually have
used the dot here once um because I didn't have any of the other heuristics so there there are
like a dot rproj thing or our project file I'll sometimes even keep those because I'm like
distributing stuff to students and stuff so that still exists um most of my repositories are git
repositories and so it looks for like a git folder um I think it looks for like a readme and so it'll
like there are other tricks um if I'm using like a brand new folder with nothing else in it that
would signal what the root is that's where I do stick like a dot here thing um but I've only done
that a couple times um but that's another thing you can do yeah thank you so much all right let's
move on to project manager yeah so project manager what it does is it's a list of projects that you
have and you can actually so let me I'm going to add this thing so this is some random folder I
think it's on my desktop it is so I made this data science lab desktop thing so if I come to
the command palette and search for project manager I can say save project um and then I can name it
something sure so now over in my project manager palette which is here I have this and so there's
that data science lab project so I can just like click on this guy and it'll open a new product or
a new window with it in there um if you right click on it you can actually add tags to it and
so I have stuff like sorted by research projects by the classes I'm teaching personal stuff you
can have whatever tags you want so it makes it easier to organize the stuff you have in there
so this added a button to your activity bar yeah so it's um okay one of the things on the side here
called project manager okay so we install project manager we get a little thing with like
folders as an icon and then that allows us to have projects and the way you add projects there's no way
to do it from here um yeah so you have to do it from the command palette so you just search for
project manager save project and that will take whatever folder you have open and count that as a
project um and then it'll put it over on the side and then we can tag it with stuff this is
amazing this is so good oh well I'm excited make it even cooler so this is a little preview of the
raycast stuff I'm going to show um the project manager extension can connect to raycast and so
I have it set up where if I mash down ctrl shift option command so like that whole corner of my
keyboard and then p it will bring up this and that will actually search all of the projects
that I have in project manager and so from wherever I'm at on my computer this is just
like raycast which is a third-party program application thing I can come and say I need to
open my data viz spring class and amazing and Sharon asked if you could just show one more time
how you add those tags oh so add the tags you right click on the project manager so you right
click on one of the ones that's added and then you can say edit tags and then those are in there
I think when you first install it it has no tags and you have to go into like the json file to add
the the tags that you want to use okay um but then once those are there like it has it says in the
readme how to do that once they're there then you can like check them and stuff amazing and thank
you to everybody who is helping out tyler in the chat with the xlsx conditional formatting question
it's a fantastic one and yes tyler if you've only started using git recently it might not be
um a default thought to be like oh everything is going to have a dot git but it's a good idea any
anyway for everything to be tracked in git right so if you always have a dot get in your root folder
positron will always know where the root is it's a it's a good way to know like if you've done the
right thing and remembered to track your project okay we are at the halfway mark we're 30 minutes
in um I wanted to have one more question from the chat and then we can hop to the next thing
mylene asked hey how did you discover all of these great question um randomly um so i've been
using um vs code for non-r stuff for years like back um in like 2017 2018 so like all the python
stuff i do i need general text editing because it is nice like having multiple cursors and doing all
of that stuff so i do all of my r stuff in our studio and everything else in vs code and so
i've known about other vs code extensions for years just by stumbling across them um and reading
random blog posts and coming to things like this and seeing what people are doing and there's lots
of people on the posit team um that will like do blog posts about neat things they do and extensions
they like and so it's really just kind of stumbling across this stuff yeah oh actually there's a
extension roundup that somebody put out isabella is it simon who put together a like data science
plus extension bundle garrick garrick okay okay garrick so garrick ate and buoy put together a
little data science plus bundle if i can find it i'll stick it in the chat um and i lied we have
one more question olrich asked um how github is integrated in depositron compared to using
desk desktop github i have never used desktop github i always use the terminal or i would use
um like the ui in our studio i like it in positron way better it gives me way more visibility and
transparency so if you have a second to change to like point that out we could do that yeah so
this is um the source for my data viz class this semester um and so i just like put something here
it has one of these panels here is the source control panel um and so it shows stuff that's
happened so i can click here and see what has been added i can um i could commit just this
chunk here if there were other chunks i could do that or i can do the whole file
and then i can say whatever and then commit um and you can push to github from here too
or just sync what you can click the sync button and that'll do the same thing
um and then of course if you still want to use your terminal it's right down there at the bottom
some people have actually been telling me that they only use keyboard commands to switch their
focus between console and terminal and i would really like to figure out how to do that
uh sometime soon because i'm a keyboard queen i don't like clicking things if i don't have to but
okay all right so with that actually do uh emil had a blog post a while ago about how to do that
so if you look at the website thing um so i have all of my little settings here too if you want to
see them but there's this cool keyboard shortcut section um where i copied from emil here the blog
post link is there um where he has it set up where i can like i've copied it where if i press command
period and then command one two or three it'll switch to those different areas so if i'm like
here typing i can say command period two and now i'm down in the console you can say command period
three and now i'm in the terminal and command period one and now i'm back in the editor
and so that's thanks to uh emil there and it's in discord as well thank you oh i love it
okay 33 minute mark how much further can we go in seeing all of andrew's positron secrets
what's next all right so one last thing before i show the cool connections panel
is notice how this window is blue and if i open up a different data viz thing
so here's my fall one it is red that's so cool so the the reason that works is because there's
an extension called uh peacock and that lets you set project specific colors to your windows and
i find this is super helpful because i'm often um like copying the same materials from a previous
semester into the current semester and so many times i've accidentally gone the other way and
like i will edit the previous semester and push it and i don't see anything live on like the
current semester um and it's so frustrating and i overwrite stuff and you've probably all run into
that um and so what i do is with the peacock extension if you install it you can tell it to
be a specific color for that project um and so that's like delightful and so i will do that for
anything like anything that is kind of like a a long-standing project like a class website or a
research project and i don't want to get confused about what it is i'll give it some color um i love
this i need visual cues for everything which is why i added the like uh the branch the project
name the file name to the top of my positron title part um because i need visual cues all the time at
where i am i am perpetually on the wrong branch and like i have had terrible problems with that
so this is really really helpful i'm gonna turn this one on for sure yeah it's it's great i only
discovered it i think it was in gaiden's post um about like the roundup thing and i was like wow
this is life-changing amazing life-changing also i will mention native tabs which isabella just
mentioned in the tap in the tap in the chat which we learned from dan who is usually here with us
today but he's teaching right now this semester um definitely go check out native tabs and turn
that on it's fantastic oh is that like the next thing you were no oh you just opened it yeah
that's cool very cool all right so um the connections pane this is something that's
really cool that's unrelated to like extensions and stuff but um i lost it exactly yeah so over
on the side here you have this connections panel um our studio has it too um and i find this is
really helpful if you ever have to work with databases which i rarely do um so all of my
stuff is just like academic modeling with like csv files and excel files um but occasionally i will
have to do stuff with databases like connecting to an sqlite database or a mysql database or a spark
thing or whatever um and the neat thing about positron is it lets you like navigate the database
directly from from positron itself so you can like see what the tables are and see what's in there
um which is super useful um because i like some people love the command line for like navigating
sqlite databases i don't know how to do that um and so i like like clicking on stuff and sorting
stuff and seeing what's actually in there and so the the connections panel lets you do that
um so on my little website thing i actually have a blog post tutorial showing in general how to do
it um i have these these two real life use cases where i've done this before because again i don't
typically do database stuff um i did help the state of idaho make an election reporting website
back in 2024 um and for that they have like their own proprietary database system that i
couldn't access and so what i'd ask them for was like the column names in the database so i made
my own like fake version of it locally that i could like play with and it was the same structure
and that helped um but where it's really helpful is i have this current project that has a csv file
that is zipped and when it's zipped it's 10 gigabytes um and there's like no possible way
to load that into r um or you can but it like blows stuff up and it's bad um and so one neat
thing you can do is you can shove the csv file into a duck db file which does some magic compression
stuff um and makes it work really well so once i get that 10 gigabyte file in duck db it's only
like 600 megabytes ish um and then you can do like queries with it which again i rarely use sql
queries but there's a db plier that lets you use dplyr stuff to get stuff directly out of it um
which is cool and so if you look at the code here you can actually see um so i connect to this
little duck db thing and then i load a csv file this massive thing and then stick it in the in
the database and then close it and then never have to do it again so i have the raw data
in that duck db thing and then i can just access it like a normal csv file but it's like
fast um so it's neat um so let me just show you what that looks like in practice um what the
connections panel looks like and so i have the code here on my little website thing i'm just
going to copy it and walk through all the different pieces you can see what it looks like so we'll
just make a new r file here so teddy verse great so what i'm going to do is connect to a brand new
duck db file if you've never used duck db that's okay um because it's just it's like my s it's like
sqlite that's like a single file thing that holds stuff in it so now i have this cool file here
called my fancy database dot duck db um it's just some sort of um file i don't even know what it
looks like i don't know if it's binary or plain text it's something um doesn't matter because
what i can do now is i can copy to it and so i'm going to stick gapminder in there because why not
i could stick diamonds in there i could stick whatever i want in there um and over here in the
connections panel i can now click at that and then look inside duck db and kind of twirl down here
and now i have gapminder inside that database and so i can click on this and it shows in the data
explorer so i can actually see all of the data inside there which is cool um you can use db
plier to get stuff out of it so i can use this this table function that will connect to that
database pull out that gapminder data set um this will actually run filter as an sql command like it
does some behind the scenes translation into sql and then collect will bring it into r as a data
frame so that is now gapminder 2007 but the way it worked was grabbing it from the database through
some query collecting the data and bringing it back in um and then you can do stuff with it um
which is cool so that's all through this connections panel here um that works for
sqlite and mysql and postgres and spark and any database provider that works in our studio or if
you have like an odbc driver thing on your computer it should show up here and you can connect to
stuff so amazing this is something i have literally never used i didn't use the connections
pane in our studio either but i like you do not generally need to connect to databases i do
sometimes but i just you know do it with code with a con and i move on this is so nice having
a thing that you can actually navigate in your eye okay i saw a question tyler asked in the chat
and i would love if we could hop back to peacock for just a second to help answer it tyler says
when i change the peacock color it's changing colors for everything am i missing a setting
um everything like let's see let's just change this to that's probably a hex color
yeah cool so that just changed it like that so if you go into peacock if you go into the general
settings um there it is you can say keep foreground color so there are other settings you can
change in peacock and that might be controlling what is actually getting colored um it also might
be a theme thing so i'm using like the monokai theme if you're using some other theme it might
interact differently with peacock um not entirely sure but yeah it's if you search in here for
peacock and then you can like darken it and that like changes it and you can do other things in
there um yeah you can reset the workspace colors there's some way to do like favorite surprise me
with a random color random color yeah i like it so yeah it's in there somewhere okay perfect
thanks for the pause cool we had one more question from javier which was on the topic of the
extension panel or the um the connections pane he says does anybody use no does he use any
duck db extensions in conjunction with db player and remote databases um i probably would if i
used this more often but i don't um mostly because again like my really truly current use case for
this is that massive file um that 10 gigabyte thing and so i just have to like connect to it
and i actually use targets instead to kind of connect to it um get a subset of it clean it up
and then save that as like an rds file and then that's the only thing i ever touch again um and
so i don't like regularly connect to the database um but there are cool things out there and javier
mentions like an mcp extension for it so you can do like cool ai type stuff with with duck db um
but i just haven't done that i'm not cool databases all right we'll go play around with it
all right what's next okay so next is um general non-r workflow stuff that makes life easier
um and so i i did mention already like raycast like if i mash all these things down and press
p this brings up all of my projects and so i can open that so what raycast is is if you are on a
mac you have if you press command space on your mac it opens up spotlight which is like the built
in way of like searching for things on your computer or um opening folders you it's a
calculator too if you type one plus one it'll show you two um and so you can do that with spotlight
um raycast is basically spotlight but fancier like super fancy um it's free um if you go to
raycast.com um you can download it they just released like a beta version for windows like
a month ago um so i'm assuming it's cool i have not tried it yet because i don't use windows so
i can't even try it but it's probably cool um so raycast lets you do all sorts of neat things they
have a huge presence on youtube um the way they make their money it's free but they have like a
pro version where you can like sign up for different ai models and does other ai type stuff
um and so that's how they make their money but i don't pay them anything because i don't use any of
their ai stuff okay cool so everything you're going to show is on the free version yeah everything
here is free and so yeah if you check out this 101 things you can do with raycast it it takes
like five minutes and just goes through really quick so like here's a calculator one plus one
neat um you can say like next tuesday is january 20th neat so like that but you can also search
for stuff like if i want to open up minecraft there it is um that's cool so it's like a general
thing for searching your computer yeah is this is the like command option control p is that something
you decided or is that a recast that's something i decided so that's that's where raycast gets
magical is like on its surface it looks just like a regular like application searcher or file
searcher like spotlight but if you go into the settings for raycast it has all sorts of like
extensions that do other things and you can set global global keyboard shortcuts for them so like
i have this setup where if i press command option k that will paste whatever is in my clipboard as
plain text and so if i'm copying from like word and there's bold and italics in it that will strip
it all and just put it as plain text wherever i am um and so that's that's where i'm setting
these hotkeys here so this little diamond thing that's uh that's a short version of control shift
option command like mashing all of that stuff so if i do mash all that stuff and then press g
it'll bring up this little thing where it will search my github repositories so i can search
for tidyverse and then that will open up a new tab now adrian and i just had the same reaction
which was like very large eyes and slightly upset because that is so cool all it does is like
there's a in github if you type user colon your name and then whatever that will search your own
things but i always forget that and so yeah i just like mash this press g and then if i remember like
i remember i had gg halves once and so i'll do this and say oh there's how i use gg halves and
so i can like find it there so that's set up bruno is also amazed y'all um i'm losing it that
is the amazing and like for just like um for anybody who does not use a mac control option
and command in a macbook at least are all right next to each other they're just like three fingers
in a row and that's what you're talking about andrew right it's like those three in a row
yeah it's so easy you don't have to do finger gymnastics to get there
so good okay time check we have 13 minutes left all right i don't want to get in your way
but do we have any questions in the chat if we do i actually have a picture of all of those
keyboard shortcuts at the website things you can see kind of the neat things i do there
um that link to searching on github like i have the magic incantation to do that a bunch of other
stuff so there's the project manager smashing everything pressing p there's a project manager
extension you can install and it works um there's some cool scripts so the other cool thing about
raycast is it can run any arbitrary script um and so like i often like when i'm setting seeds for
like analysis i like to go to random.org and grab a seed from there just because it feels more random
and uses atmospheric noise or whatever so if i come here and type seed and press enter it just
grabbed it and copied it onto the clipboard so now i have that as my seed 8 9 3 0 0 7 so that
just grabbed it because it ran some script to do it so i actually have a link to all of my scripts
here if you go there you can see all of the cool stuff that's there so there's get seed
um i have a thing that toggles my little ring light here that's on my webcam so i can turn it
on and off um so oh my gosh so it works with your like peripherals yeah as long as like if there's
a script to do stuff with it yeah um because it just runs like bash commands and stuff it's amazing
okay i'm gonna stop because i have a couple questions first a shout out sharon um added in
the chat that she has a notebook lm notebook where she's added all of the positron um docs to it i
myself am a heavy notebook lm user i love it so much so user friendly if you've never used it
please go play with it you can use a ui to add sources and then it's basically like a little
self-contained rag where it's only going to search the stuff that you want but when it does
give you results it gives you citations for everything so you hover over a citation takes
you straight to the source and highlights where it got the information from extremely helpful for
docs um so she shared that go check that out in the chat i will if you're watching this later i'll
put it in the description um and then we had a couple of questions she also asked mcp raycast
mcp servers yes raycast does mcps that i don't know if that's only behind the pro stuff but it
does do cool mcp things um so yeah so let's go yeah everybody go uh investigate on your own for
that one at least we know that it's there abdullah also asked is there a hack to manage a repo that
is both a project and an r package i'm not sure maybe people in the chat can chime in about that
one if you have any tidbits for abdullah might be slightly off topic for our talk here but we
can definitely chat about it in the chat marlene says andrew i've learned more about positron in
the last hour than i have in the last one okay well we have 10 minutes left how much further
can we get it's left so a couple other cool little things about raycast before i show one
more thing and then answer whatever questions you have um so if you notice this thing up here
in my menu bar that shows that i'm currently in this meeting and it knows that because raycast
can put like your upcoming events up in the menu bar and it's cool um and it's smart enough where
like if it's right before the event and you press like command space to get to it it will show that
current event like the upcoming event there and then i can just hit enter and it'll open zoom or
webex or whatever and like command space what is that command space is how you open raycast in
general like that's how you like open the raycast search my gosh but it'll show up there um it has
a built-in clipboard history thing which is magic so you can go back and see everything you've copied
and go back and grab it so you don't need like a third-party clipboard history manager it's in
there did you like press something specific to get to that oh yeah so i have that set
so um i have command basically command option shift k is what i have it set for and it'll your
brain must be very interesting on the inside to just have all of this in a rolodex yeah i don't
know like i never remember them i have to like imagine the keyboard and like mesh stuff and like
oh yeah it's that one um it's got an emoji picker so i can like do this type of thing and search for
emojis or whatever which is cool it has this is cool too if you search for a color picker it has
a built-in color picker so i can say what that color and it copies this is amazing so i use a
browser extension that does not work very well and i don't like it so that's this is a fantastic like
all-in-one tool and also i saw bruno you had said like hey i recommend a future session on notebook
lm i think that's a fantastic idea and when you leave this session there's going to be a little
survey that has a little part that's like what do you want to see somebody go through live on screen
put that as a suggestion okay okay so the last little thing here is weird um this cool program
called espanso which is a separate program from raycast that does a completely different thing
it is also free and um maybe open source it's cross platform it works on windows and linux and
stuff um if you've ever heard of text expander i used to use that for a long time it's the same
thing but free and open source um and so um basically you type something like in that little
demonstration they typed colon date and it automatically expanded to the current date
you can do that with all sorts of cool stuff um and it's it works across the whole system so like
positron and our studio have ways of like setting snippets of code so if you type something it'll
like put code there that's helpful i don't like doing those because i'll often be in different
editors and i don't want to like set up one snippet in one place and a snippet in another place
um and so i i don't do that um so what i do instead is if you look at this link here these
are all of my espanso shortcuts um and there's all sorts of like really cool things um so for example
let me just show a few highlights um there's like a billion and this again is just like
the accumulated cruft of working with text expanders since 2009 um and then i didn't then
they moved to like a subscription thing and then i didn't want to pay for that and then espanso
existed so and they're free um raycast has its own system i just it i don't like it as much it's not
as fully featured as espanso so i don't use it but you could do that too um so for instance if i'm
like typing stuff and type semicolon d t it expands to the current date if i do semicolon
d a t e it does that date if i do semicolon d z it does a date with the little t thing inside
for like a blog post like um timestamp um so you can do all sorts of like cool stuff that's all
just keyboard shortcuts that i've set i am a typography nerd and so if i'm writing something
like one minus one that's the wrong minus sign um and so i have a thing where if i do semicolon
minus that's the correct minus sign which uses the same the crossbars at the same level as the
plus sign so they line up i love it that has always bothered me but i if you do like can't
be bothered to like learn the alt commands yeah the windows there are alt commands on a mac there's
lots of alt commands like you can do option minus and but not here um option minus outside of
positron will do like an n dash um so what i do here is if i do semicolon e n n that adds an n
dash so it's kind of a workaround for working in positron there um if you have like an x here i
have it set to do the actual multiply sign if i do times so that's the true multiplication sign
so stuff like that or if i'm just like typing i study institutions which is a really hard word
to spell if you're writing fast actually study authoritarian institutions and that's like a lot
of words and i will write authoritarian institutions and it's like awful so i have it
set where if i type a u t h n it expands to authoritarian and then i s t t n institution
or like n i have n triple because i can never spell that word so it expands to entrepreneurial
um so all sorts of cool stuff it has cool menus too so if i start a brand new document and want
like yaml metadata for like a carto file i can do semicolon semicolon qmd and it popped up on the
other screen it brings up this cool menu thing where i have different headers that i can
potentially use like a basic yaml header there it is and so now i can insert stuff or let me
do this so if i do qmd again let me show it over here i can say full academic quarto yaml header
it got confused because it's on a different screen it's okay the joys of screen sharing
oh it's messed up but it would put a bunch of stuff there um yeah so all sorts of cool stuff
if you look at the website there's other things oh this is another cool thing is if i type call
out it brings up this cool little thing that i've made so i can add a quarto call out like a warning
that is collapsed that is the simple appearance without an icon so i can just type call out
that is the simple appearance without an icon submit that's all there and now i can add my
little call out warning stuff so i have lots of little things for adding uh card specific
things like if if you're making like a reveal js slideshow and you want multiple columns i can do
col and there's my column divs this is so cool this is the stuff that i never remember how to do
and i almost always have to go copy paste from another one of my documents well we have some
questions that have rolled in through the discord we have three minutes left let's see if we can hit
some answers for things really quick rapid fire is raycast a replacement for spotlight and
bartender it's a replacement for spotlight it's not quite a replacement for bartender so bartender
on a mac is um if you have a menu bar with lots of things in it bartender lets you like collapse
them into like a hidden menu bar bartender is expensive okay and but there is a thing called ice
menu bar that is like an open source menu bar thing for mac os so this is an open source bartender
and that's what i use now it's great cool someone also asked logan asked what browser are you using
i think you're using arc using arc so i will say oh ryan put it in arc.net as well um sharon asked
is there an easy way to see all of the shortcuts that you have already set up i think there is
um so all the espanso shortcuts kind of um so if you look at this all my shortcuts and settings
that's a git repository so espanso is cool because it's all plain text configured so if
i come to like match here so like here is um programming stuff so if i type like semicolon wm
it will make this warning false message false quarto chunk metadata thing um there's nothing
magic about the semicolon thing some people do colon some people uh won't have like a prefix
i just like the semicolon thing because i don't typically write like semicolon fig w like that's
not a common thing i type um so it's not going to accidentally trigger it so everything is in this
git repository there for raycast if you filter your stuff to show only customized then you can
see all of the stuff that you've set and see all the keyboard shortcuts there amazing jared
your question i don't know what it means but i'm gonna ask what shortcut have you set for an intera
bang oh i don't have one um but i should so that's the the combination question mark exclamation mark
like in one character um so oh okay i get it intera bank um how david under asked how is he
triggering those word replacements so that is because espanso is a it's just running up here
in my menu bar on windows it would run down in like the taskbar thing and so it just watches
what you type and so if you trigger any of these things like this r stop or semicolon r stop will
add this knitter knit exit thing um and so that will trigger it if i have i have this long words
thing so i've got lots like multinomial can never spell that so i have it semicolon mnl um
authoritarian i don't have a semicolon there i just like start typing au th and and then it
magically turns into authoritarian characteristics that's a tricky one so i type cars and it magically
changes um so yeah you can see all my stuff so these are just like code snippets but they're
for words all right well we've we've hit the top of the hour i know people are gonna have to jump
this was amazing andrew thank you so much for coming this has been recorded it's going to be
on youtube eventually thank you thank you thank you i hope you had a good time everybody stick
around in the discord server continue to ask questions answer each other's questions um and
we'll see you all next week on tuesday andrew would you like to say goodbye thank you so much
yeah thanks for coming everybody this was great i can talk about this stuff like all day this is
it's my way of procrastinating is i could listen to it all day okay well go read andrew's blog he
so kindly packaged that all up for us and we'll see you this thursday on the data science hangout
we have mina uh chetinkaya rundell if you know mina you know that she's amazing come see her
on thursday and then we'll see you next week at the lab bye everybody bye